Feature extraction parameters

July 24, 2023



analysis and optimization is ongoing for many of these parameters



RESPIRATION

Answer buffer, excluded from analysis = +/- 1.25 seconds surrounding the
verbal answer

Resp measurement buffer = 2.5 seconds, a sliding window for which the
the excursion is calculated as the sum of absolute differences of each
successive sample. excrusion values are then aggregated and subjective
to a scaling factor (currently set to 1, that allows for respiration
values that are of similar scale to EDA and cardio, and which make for
simpler intuition for field examiners who want to think about their
relative strength)

RLE constraints are currently set symmetrically for + and - ESS scores
RLEMinConstraint = 1.2 RLEMaxConstraint = 1.5 These constraints were
previously set assymetrically. Optimization is much easier when the +
and - scores are analyzed separately, but there are
social/emotional/comfort advantages to a symmetrical solution, and this
works nearly as well as the previous solution.

Some constraint is need to prevent attempting to score when the
respiration data are flatlined, but none is currently in use.

EDA

EDA Latency = .5 seconds. More optimization work (analysis not
conjecture) is needed on the EDA latency.

ROW = starts at the latency and ends 5 seconds after verbal answer (or
stimulus offset if not verbal answer)

WOE = 15 seconds

ShortWindow = 13.5 seconds

WOE is extended not strict = meaning that responses that + slope
reactions that continue outside the WOE are scored to the end of
reaction, instead of stoping that the end of the WOE

Row is extended not strict, meaning that when a response starts in the
ROW all + slope segments in the WOE are included except those that begin
in the ShortWindow (this prevents scoring + slope segments that begin
late in the WOE when the using the extended ROW)

SlopeChange is active (not off) using a statistical method instead of
simple approximation. Slope change parameters include the length of two
sliding windows and the alpha level for the z-test preSeg = 1 second
postSeg = 1 second alpha = .0001 (about 3.07 standard deviations) The
mean SD of each postSeg is compared to each preSeg, When significant,
the imputed response onset is located at the end of the preSeg When a
series of samples produces a sig value only the min is kept so that we
maximize the peak-onset y distance

The slope change rule is active even when there are normal response
onset in the form of an onset of a + slope segment. This could be set to
use the slope change rule only when there are no normal response onsets
in the ROW, but analysis indicates it is optimal to keep this rule
active at all times.

response onset may be imputed statistically only when the slop is +

tonicSec = 2.5 sec so that response onset will is not imputed if the
preceeding segment is not +

sChangeLat = 2.5 sec so that response onset will not be imputed during
the first 2.5 sec after question onset

The something vs nothing concept (SNC) is not used for the EDA at this
times because there are problems and inconsistencies in the way that
field examiners use the concept. More analysis is needed.

There is no EDA rule for descending data (1/2 way or otherwise) because
the rule is not published anywhere, and there are serious problems with
the idea

R/C Ratios are not calculated for small reactions less than 0.0025% of
the y axis total, and are not calculated if the sum of RQ and CQ
response is less than 1% of the y-axis. Humans can see reactions of 1%
or less on the screen.

EDAMinConstraint = 1.1 so that small differences in RQ and CQ are
assigned an ESS score = 0



CARDIO

Cardio latency = .05 seconds

ROW and WOE are the same as the EDA ROW = latency to 5 sec after the
verbal answer (or stim offset if no answer) WOE = 15 seconds

The length of the WOE makes very little difference after 15 seconds.

ROW and WOE are both set to extended mode. Cardio reaction are scored to
the Peak as long as the slope is + when the response starts in the ROW,
and all + slope segments in the WOE are included when there is a usable
response onset in the ROW.

Cardio shortWindow = 13.5 seconds to prevent scoring + slope changes
that occur late in the WOE when using the extended ROW

SlopeChange is off (not active) at present for the Cardio because it
does not seem to increase accuracy and may contribute to errors. More
optimization work is needed on this

The something vs nothing concept is not active at this time because it
produces more errors than correct scores for the cardio. More analysis
is needed.

R/C Ratios are not calculated for small reactions less than 0.0025% of
the y axis total, and are not calculated if the sum of RQ and CQ
response is less than 1% of the y-axis. Humans can see reactions of 1%
or less on the screen.

CardioMinConstraint = 1.25 so that small differences in RQ and CQ are
assigned an ESS score = 0. Cardio data is more noisy than EDA and scores
are optimized by a stronger constraint value.




VASOMOTOR

prestimSegment = 3 seconds

latency = 5 seconds (stim onset to 5 seconds after stim onset)

stimulusSegment = 5 seconds beginning after the latency period

measurement is the distance between the diastolic and systolic lines
after these lines are interpolated from the systolic and diastolic peaks
(changes in + and - slope at the syst and diast lines). This can also be
calculated as the FPEL (y distance between the syst and diast peaks) or
the PAE (excursion length of the vasomotor pulse line). The selected
methods works optimally, and is more robust against artifacts such as
fasciculations, extrasystolics, and movements.

PLE constraint for R/C ratios and ESS scores = 1.1 and is applied to
both the pre/post ratio for each question and the R/C ratio. PLE is
interpreted as no response when the pre/post ratios is less than the
constraint, and ESS scores are not assigned when the R/C ratio is less
than the constraint.

Some constraint is needed to prevent attempting to score the PLE when
data are flatlined but not is currently in use.



