LX Edge Requirements - MEASUREMENT TABLE - DRAFT 
June 10, 2025 
Raymond Nelson



DEFINITIONS:

1. Analysis spot

An analysis spot consists of a single Relevant Question (RQ) and
Comparison Question (CQ)  response values. ESS-M uses Analysis Spots to
compute the log(R/C) ratios that are later transformed to an multinomial
integer score. Most manual scoring methods make use of analysis spots to
transform observed responses to Likert-type (subjective) scores, rank
scores or objective septile scores. Selection of analysis spots requires
information about the exact order of the stimulus events for each chart.
Most computer algorithms, including OSS-3, do not require information
about the exact order of the stimulus events.

2. Chart

A chart consists of all recorded time-series physiological data for all
polygraph recording sensors, from the X announcement (start of testing)
to the XX announcement (end of testing). A chart also includes a
time-scale and vector of events – used to record the exact location of
all announcements, instructions, annotations, stimulus questions, and
verbal answers. Some polygraph test formats may consist of a single
chart. For example, the Acquaintance Test (ACQT) – which can be analyzed
using the Ipsative-Z and other rank scoring methods – is commonly
conducted as a single chart. Also, the Directed-Lie Screening Test
(DLST), also known as the Test for Espionage and Sabotage (TES) is often
conducted as a single chart (with three “charts” within the recorded
chart), and may also include the use of a 2nd short chart to obtain a
fourth presentation of the test target stimuli. Many test formats
include the use of multiple charts within a series. CQT formats commonly
have multiple charts within a series  – typically three to five charts –
and the order of stimulus presentation will often vary for the different
charts within a CQT series. All charts within each series will commonly
have the same questions. Common practice is for field examiner to
initialize a new series whenever the test questions have changed.
However, CIT exams may include use different question for each chart
within a CIT series.

3. Comparison Question Technique (CQT)

The Comparison Question Technique (CQT) is a commonly used polygraph
technique consisting of a test question sequence that includes relevant
questions (RQs) and comparison questions (CQs), in addition to other
procedural questions. CQT data are analyzed using a combination of
ipsative methods and norm-referenced methods. Commonly CQT formats
include the Federal Zone Comparison Test (FZCT), YouPhase/BiZone Test
(BZCT), United States Air-Force Modified General Question Technique
(USAF MGQT), The Directed-Lie Screening Test (DLST), and similar test
formats developed at the University of Utah.

4. Concealed Information Test (CIT)

The concealed in formation test (CIT) is conceptually similar to the
older guilty knowledge test (GKT) and peak of tension (POT) technique.
The CIT is a diagnostic tool. It consists of a series of relevant
questions for which only the examiner and a guilty examinee will know
which question actually describes the details of a known problem (known
incident or known allegation). CIT data can be subject to statistical
analysis using integer scores and a multinomial reference model. The CIT
includes the use of multiple charts with different questions in each
chart. Some examiners may conduct the CIT with each list of different
questions recorded as a separate series.

6. Exam (examination)

The terms “exam” and “examination” are used in this document to refer to
all series and all charts conducted with a single examinee during a
single scheduled examination (typically on one calendar date) including
the polygraph interview, data acquisition, and data analysis for all
series within the exam. For the purpose of data analysis and software
development, the term “exam” refers to the recorded time-series data for
all charts and all series.

5. Feature extraction

Feature extraction is the first part of data analysis (following an
initial QA process to ensure that sufficient data have been acquired to
attempt analysis). Data analysis is completed for each series, using a
variety of methods that are intended for use with each different test
format (CQT, CIT, etc.).

6. Numerical transformation

Numerical transformation occurs after identification of the exact
location of response onset and response end for each stimulus event, and
involves the reduction transformation of time-series data into a single
numerical value that represents the physiological activity (or change in
physiological activity) that occurs in response to each test stimulus
question. Numerical transformation also refers to the reduction of
feature extraction values for the array of recording sensors to subtotal
scores for the test target stimuli, and grand total scores for series.
Although computer algorithms will necessarily approach feature
extraction and numerical transformation as distinct functions, field
practitioners who manually score polygraph data may demonstrate
over-learned skills in which they execute these functions quickly and
intuitively – often while regarding of feature extraction and numerical
transformation as a single function.

7. Relevant/Irrelevant (R/I) Technique

A polygraph technique consisting of relevant questions (RQs) and neutral
(irrelevant) questions. The R/I test does not include comparison
questions. Manual scoring methods for R/I exams are traditionally visual
and subjective. However, some computers algorithms such as the
Ipsative-Z method can compute a statistical classifier for R/I
examination data. The R/I technique is conducted as a series of several
charts in which some charts may included planned or unplanned repetition
of some test stimuli (potentially resulting in different events with the
same Label).

8. Series

A series consists of all charts with the same test stimulus questions. 
Data for each series is stored in a separate folder within a PF. Some
exams, consist of one single series. For example, a Concealed
Information Test (CIT) format may have a single series with multiple
charts. [It is also possible to conduct the CIT with each chart as a
separate series.] Other exams may consist of multiple series. For
example, comparison question test (CQT) formats most often require the
use of an Acquaintance Test (ACQT) before recording the CQT charts. All
charts within each series are scored together – though the method of
analysis may vary, and the method of combining data for different charts
may vary.

Note: LX Software used the term “EXAM” to name the different folders for
each series,. Each series folder was numbered: “EXAM1”, “EXAM2”,
“EXAM3”, etc. (with no spaces in the folder name). In contrast LX Edge
uses the term “Series” for the folders with the data for each series
stored in a separate numbered folder: “Series 1”, “Series 2”, “Series
3”, etc. (note the use of a space in the LX Edge series folder names).

DISCUSSION:

The common scenario is a CQT series with multiple charts for which the
questions are identical, though the exact sequence of questions is
changed for each chart. In general, examiners will start a new series
whenever they change the questions. However, some formats may include
the planned use of different questions for different charts. An example
of a test format that may have different questions for different charts
within a series is the CIT. Some examiners may conduct the CIT using a
new series for each different list of questions. Another example of the
use of different questions for different charts within a series can be
observed when an examiner conducts a short chart (4th presentation) in a
DLST exam – where the questions in the 2nd short chart will not include
all of the questions from the longer 1st chart. Also, questions may
differ for the charts within a CQT series as a result of ad-hoc
(unplanned) changes during testing – such as when an examiner
erroneously omits a question, repeats a question, or inserts an
annotation, instruction or neutral question. Some exams may consist of
an ACQT, along one or more CQT series, and possibly a CIT series. The
series data is used to identify the charts within each series that are
analyzed together.

REQUIREMENTS

1. A separate MeasurementsTable shall be created for each series within
an exam.

The Measurements Table can be thought of as a 2x2 table that captures
all sensor measurements for the sequence of events for all charts for
each series within an exam (examination). In other words, each series
will have a different Measurements Table.

2. The MeasurementsTable shall capture all information needed for
analysis. Also captured in the MeasurementsTable is the exact order of
presentation for all announcements, events, instructions, and
annotations during testing.

3. The MeasurementsTable shall capture information about the location of
stimulus events within the time series data, including the sample
indices for the beginning, end, and verbal answer associated with each
stimulus question.

Inclusion of this information facilitates error checking and
verification of the information from feature extraction. The
MeasurementsTable shall also capture the X (sample indices) and Y (data
values) for analysis parameters including the Minimum Response Latency
(MRL), Response Onset Window (ROW), and Window of Evaluation (WOE),
along with the sample indices and data values for  the response onset
and response peak for each stimulus event and each polygraph recording
sensor.

4. The MeasurementsTable shall be integrated with the LX Edge on-screen
calipers, including the capability to accept a substitute a manual
caliper measurement for the automated feature extraction.

This will require over-writing the information in columns 10
(sensorMeasurement), 16 (responseOnsetY), 17 (responseEndY), 24
(responseOnsetX), and 25 (responseEndX) [see below] with the information
from the caliper.

5. Manual changes to the sensorMeasurements shall be tracked/audited. In
this way the same MeasurementsTable can be used with automated feature
extraction and Manual Scoring Calipers.

VARIABLES (COLUMNS) IN THE MEASUREMENTS TABLE:

1. examName

Shall be used to maintain coherent association of all data for exam that
consist of multiple series.

2. seriesName

Shall be used to identify all charts that are analysis together.

3. chartName

Shall be used to identify a complete recorded sequence of stimulus
events within a series. Ititial stages of data analysis consists of the
ipsative comparison of stimulus events within each chart.

4. Label

The ID or metadata that uniquely identifies each stimulus event within
each chart. Polygraph field practices may sometimes permit the ad-hoc
repetition of an event within a chart. This causes a situation in which
2 or more events within a chart may have identical Labels – leading to
analytic errors. The NCCA ASCII specification does not address this.

5. eventLabel

Used to more precisely identify each unique event within each chart.
This information is not output in the NCCA ASCII data, and is created on
parsing the NCCA ASCII data for analysis. A function is used to evaluate
the Labels for each chart, searching for ad-hoc repetitions. For
repeated events (with identical Labels) and “A” is appended to the first
event, allowing the repeated presentation to retain the intended Label.
For multiple repetitions a series of “A” characters is appended.

6. sensorName

Shall be used to identify the recording sensor used to obtain the
information captured in the sensorMeasurement column.

7. Begin

Shall be used to identify the time-series sampling index where the
stimulus onset is recorded.

8. End

Shall be used to identify the time-series sampling index where the
stimulus end is recorded.

9. Answer

Shall be used to identify the time-series sampling index where the
verbal answer is recorded. Note that some events may not have a verbal
answer. For example announcements, instructions, and annotations, do not
include a verbal answer. Also, silent answer charts may or may not
include a verbal answer. And finally, examiners may occasionally neglect
to enter a verbal answer. Expected verbal answer that are missing shall
be imputed at the sample index immediately following the stimulus End
index.

10. sensorMeasurement

Shall be used to capture the measured value obtained by the feature
extraction algorithm for each recording sensor.

11. preStimY

Shall be used to capture the data value at the onset of a 10 second
pre-stimulus segment. The prestimulus segment can be used to evaluate
tonicity or baseline prior to stimulus onset.

12. beginY

Shall be used to capture the data value at stimulus onset.


13. latY

Shall be used to capture the data value at the end of the Minimum
Response Latency (MRL). This can be used, together with the BeginY
value, to evaluate if data are ascending or descending at stimulus
onset.

14. endY

Shall be used to capture the data value at the stimulus End. This can be
used, together with the BeginY value, to determine if the data are
flat-lined or unresponsive.

15. answerY

Shall be used to capture the data value at the recorded point of verbal
answer

16. responseOnsetY

Shall be used to capture the data value at the response onset index
selected during feature extraction.

17. responseEndY

Shall be used to capture the data value at the response peak (or
response end) index selected during feature extraction.

18. rowEndY

Shall be used to capture the data value at the end of the Response Onset
Window.

19. woeEndY

Shall be used to capture the data value at the end of the Response Onset
Window. This

20. responseRecY

Shall be used to capture the data value at the response recovery
(half-recovery) index.

21. postStimY

Shall be used to capture the data value at the end of the post-stimulus
segment (10 seconds after the WOE). This can be used to determine
changes in tonicity. Note that the post-stimulus segment for each event
is also the pre-stimulus segment for the next event.

22. preStimX

Shall be used to capture the sample index for the pre-stimulus segment 
(10 seconds prior to stimulus onset) for each stimulus event.

23. latencyEndX

Shall be used to capture the sample index for the end of the MRL for
each stimulus event.

24. responseOnsetX

Shall be used to capture the sample index for the response onset
selected during feature extraction.

25. responseEndX

Shall be used to capture the sample index for the response peak (or
response end) selected during feature extraction.

26. ROWEndX

Shall be used to capture the sample index at the end of the ROW.

27. WOEEndX

Shall be used to capture the sample index at the end of the WOE.

28. responseRecX

Shall be used to capture the sample index at the half-recovery point
(the point at which the data have returned half-way from the
response-peak y-value to the response onset y-value).

29. postStimX

Shall be used to capture the sample index at end of the post-stimulus
segment (10 seconds after the end of the WOE).

30. rankScore

Shall be used to capture the Rank sensor score for each stimulus event
(Rank 1 is the greated observed change in physiological activity).

31. changeAudit

Shall be used to track/audit manual changes to the automated feature
extraction values.

32. RRMScore

Shall be used to capture the Relative Response Magnitude score for each
sensor for each event. (Raskin et al., 1988)

33. miritelloRankScore

Shall be used to capture the Miritello Rank score for each sensor for
each event. (Miritello, 1999)

34. ipZScore

Shall be used to capture the Ipsative-Z score for each sensor for each
stimulus event. This algorithm can be used with CIT, RI, and CQT exams.

35. RCScore

Shall be used to capture the log(R/C) ratio computed during ESS-M
scoring. Log(R/C) scores are used by ESS-M, and are captured only for
RQs.

36. CQName

Shall be used to capture the name of the CQ selected for each RQ
analysis spot used to compute the log(R/C) ratio. This information
permits the examiner to inspect the analytic output.

37. ESSScore

Shall be used to capture the ESS-M integer score that is obtained from
the log(R/C) ratio

38. OSS3Score

Shall be used to capture the standardized log(R/C) ratios that are used
to compute OSS-3 weighted means (and p-values).

39. CQMean

Shall be used to capture the CQmean value used to compute the
standardized log(R/C) ratios for OSS-3

40. OSS2Score

Shall be used to capture the OSS-2 integer score.

41. PAScore

Shall be used to capture the mean z-scores used to compute the result of
the Probability Analysis algorithm.

42. ROSSScore

Shall be used to capture the integer scores from the Rank Order Scoring
System (ROSS) – with larger rank values indicating greater changes in
physiological activity.

43. PSSScore

Shall be used to capture the sensor scores for the Permutation Scoring
System.

44. bootstrapScore

Shall be used to capture the sensor scores for the Bootstrap Scoring
System.

45. LXCATScore

Shall be used to capture the sensor scores for the LX CAT analysis
(ESS-M type) algorithm.


